# Detecting-Malaria-With-CNNs

## Introduction to Problem
Malaria is a life-threatening disease that has claimed millions of lives around the world. Caused by a parasite, people with malaria often experience symptoms of chills and fever and can develop severe complications when the disease is left untreated. According to the World Health Organization, there were an estimated 219 million cases of malaria and 435,000 malaria deaths in 2017 [1]. Populations most at risk of contracting the disease include those located in poor tropical areas such as sub-Saharan Africa, South East Asia, and South America. In many of the countries affected by the disease, malaria is a leading cause of illness and death. Early detection is critical for ensuring a proper diagnosis and increasing chances of survival, but diagnosis of malaria is often difficult in these areas. 

Microscopic thin and thick blood smear examinations are a commonly used and well-known method for disease diagnosis. A standard diagnosis based on a blood-smear test involves examination at 100x magnification, where up to 5,000 blood cells with parasites need to be manually counted. The process is therefore extremely time-consuming, and the diagnostic accuracy depends heavily on human expertise. Unfortunately, health personnel are often undertrained, underequipped, and underpaid. In addition, they face excessive patient loads, needing to distinguish between malaria and several other severe infectious diseases. This makes the possibility of a wrong diagnosis from human error likely. 

These current issues with manual diagnosis present the case for the automation of the malaria diagnosis process via machine learning. Deep learning models, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have been proven to be very effective in a wide variety of computer vision tasks. They have previously achieved success in tasks involving image classification, image and video recognition, medical image analysis, natural language processing, and more. Automating the malaria diagnosis process can offer several benefits and allow for the delivery of quick and reliable healthcare in resource-scarce areas. 

## <b> Data </b>
The dataset chosen is from the National Library of Medicine. It consists of 27,558 segmented cell images from thin blood smear slides and their associated diagnosis (uninfected vs. parasitized). Positive samples contain the parasite Plasmodium. The dataset was balanced—there were equal instances of uninfected and parasitized cell images (13,794 each). 

The desired raw input of the system is an image and the raw output is the diagnosis. The data was given in two folders, one with infected images and the other with uninfected images. Preprocessing the data involved converting the images in both folders into 64x64 NumPy arrays. Labels were given and encoded into one hot vectors where [0,1] represents an infected cell and [1,0] represents an uninfected cell. Then, both the data and labels were shuffled and split into training, validation, and test sets. The training set contained 60% of the data (16534 images) and the validation and test sets each contained 20% of the data (5512 images). 

## <b> Approach & Results </b>
The model used for the task is a convolutional neural network (CNN) with 20 layers. It contains 4 convolutional 2D layers, 4 max pooling 2D layers, 4 batch normalization layers, 5 dropout layers, 2 dense layers, and 1 global average pooling layer. Each convolutional 2D layer is followed by a max pooling 2D layer, and then batch normalization and dropout layers. The number of filters for the convolutional 2D layers were 32, 64, 128, and 128. For the dropout layers after batch normalization, the dropout ratio was 0.1. For the dropout layer after the first dense layer, the dropout ratio was 0.25. The model used binary cross entropy for its loss function and Adam as its optimizer. In total, the model contained 376,386 total parameters with 375,682 trainable parameters. 

The CNN was able to achieve an accuracy of >96%, outperforming rapid diagnositic tests (RDTs) and microscopy, two of the most commonly used ways to diagnose malaria in the present. 
